- Secrets of staying motivated at your Work
	- Post Covid-era (or are we still struggling with it, cannot comment right now) the boundaries between work at office, home and work at home have blurred. Both  your worlds Office and home have collided with each other, going by the marvel cinematic universe lingo - its an incursion that was bound to happen in this new way of corporate life now.
	- What I personally observed - being at a physically different location called - 'The Office' helped you disconnect from work once you left that building. Now, your work is in at your home just a door away and that not being able to establish clear boundaries might hurt the much sought work-life balance
	- I felt the same pinch and started finding ways whether it was doing some research online or reading about it, putting some advises to practice here are my two cents that helped a lot in general
		- Establish work free zone - No kidding, when at home and working, ensure you have a designated space / zone to do your office work. Helps if its located where you don't interfere with your family's daily routine. YES ! For a change consider you are not the center of their universe. Respect your family's daily routine as they respect your work.
		  This exercise will help you  disconnect from work when you step out of your work zone. Helping you relax and staying motivated for the next schedule when you step back into it. Yes, it sounds like one of those motivational videos on YouTube but try this exercise and see the difference yourselves.
		- Do the work that matters - Here is a controversial statement - Its not about how hard you work  but how smart you work. Again - I am sure you have read or heard this 'n' number of times but do you practice it in your day to day schedule ? What I learnt and I am still putting to practice is the art of understanding how to prioritize your work. Finishing the stuff that matters and has higher impact and prioritizing it over other work will help immensely to boost your confidence and make a great impact where it matters! You will start seeing an high productive outcome of your 8 hours at work. Making that IMPACT at work subconsciously keeps us motivated. Isn't that what we strive for - making an impact!
		- Learn to Say NO - Again not what you'd expect to find in this list right? But its important to learn and understand when to say NO to something that might be an expectation or even an ask from your responsibilities. As I wrote above, once you prioritize your work, whatever falls on the lower end of the list, has no significant impact or when you don't have sufficient bandwidth to deliver it as per expectations - make it clear to the requester. Explain the blockers or hinderances in the task without being apologetic about it. Nothing helps drive projects and tasks to realistic completion than setting up clear estimates and expectations from the beginning.
		-
		- Keep that buffer in place - Always have that extra buffer time in your calendar (besides the usual that you have to block to complete your daily tasks) Why? Because always expect the unexpected. One thing I have learnt dealing with operations all these years is that an incident, escalation or even stretched assignments will eat up in your other schedules which would be important for the day, in turn delaying the rest of the tasks and you end up stretching beyond capacity. Sounds familiar right? Understand what buffer works for you. Keep it aside by maybe even blocking your calendar. Use it to complete stretched assignments, handle those unexpected calls or meetings there or even better if nothing's pending in your schedule use this buffer to relax and unwind, who says you can only unwind over weekends. Small breaks keep us fresh and motivated for the rest of the day. But you have decide what works best for you!