- THE PILOT EPISODE
  If I had to describe my journey in Nuance in one word, it must be - 'rewarding'. I started in Service Reliability Center Team at Nuance as a Senior SRC Engineer, JAN 2020 (Yes just two months before we closed offices due to the onset of COVID pandemic).  This is where I was introduced to the refreshing culture of the team but what set SRC apart is that every member of the team was genuinely concerned and emphatic towards fellow colleagues. This reflected in every action, example making sure there is enough snacks and food (from those extra lunchboxes the team brought) for the next shift that dropped in during off hours.
  We all know - The pandemic hit in start of March 2020, which meant I had spent close to two months in the office (also - excluding two weeks of FEB 2020 where I got married!) - in this short duration the collaboration and team bonding I had surprises me even now.
  GROWTH, TRUST, and NEW CHALLENGES
  Close to SEP 2020, we onboarded the process of Incident Management for the Enterprise business silo completely. I started working as we would term it - hybrid mode, taking care of SRC operations of Healthcare Operations and Incident Management for Enterprise Operations. What this did is gave me insights of how both sides of the operations worked giving a holistic view and setting up stage to the next challenge. Given the volume of the incidents we had - it was obvious that a dedicated team would be a requirement for the new onboarded process and the wheels started turning with the help of the very talented TA team, we had first few members hired almost immediately as dedicated incident managers.
  Accountability and Responsibility are the two most rewarded values in SRC. All I can assume is the leadership noticed my exercise of handling both sides but not slacking on the Incident Management probably also giving it some extra care to avoid unpleasant escalations, I was assigned the job to build the new dedicated IM Team in turn also promoting me to lead of Operations at SRC.
  BUILDING A NEW TEAM
  This was a whole new ballgame for me. So far, I have worked as a System Administrator, Product Support Analyst, Service Reliability Engineer but never had an experience of leading a team. I had my share of nervousness, doubts, and anxiety - a lot of ANXIETY, stepping into the new shoes but as we progressed, I was more relaxed as I had a great number of mentors to look up within the Team.
  Though what seemed to be a challenge due to the new WFH norm, the regular virtual interactions and friendly nature of everyone ensured there were no hiccups in onboarding of new incident managers as we grew. Making everyone comfortable with the team and the work was the primary objective. The only way to facilitate that is to ensure that whole team understands - that it was okay to make mistakes as a new team, it’s all part of the learning curve that we are on and we only grow and move ahead from the day before and the team has each other's back.
  Since then, the team has achieved fantastic milestones. Whether its handling 300+ incidents in a month or covering shift and on-call in case of emergencies that another colleague could face - it is very empathy and care towards fellow team members that everyone steps up, shares the load, and allows other members to take care of other important things outside of their work.
  I remember the interview panel explaining Incident Manager responsibilities, how it might not have a very high work-life balance given nature of on-call shifts and volume of incidents. But just seeing how the team has grown and handles all the crisis situations, this team has managed to have probably the best work life balance one could ask for. I am proud we were able to turn that perception around and all credit goes to the fantastic people we have in the team and that SRC Culture which reflects throughout.
  SEASON FINALE
  The Incident Management Team now runs its own boat and are their own captain. Every individual show accountability. Like we mentioned earlier - They step up to the occasion, always and I guess that makes them a champion in their own sense. Is this the best Incident Management Team? No, we have a long path ahead of us and a very huge scope to improve, but if there is any team that can achieve all this - it’s this team. A very underdog turned champion story right here. And just the thought of me being able to contribute as a part of this team has a great amount of satisfaction.