- **THE PILOT EPISODE**
- I haven't ever tried to express my self in form of writing an article or a blog. This is my first attempt and I am confident that the readers would be more than generous.
  If there was one word to describe my journey in Nuance, being part of the Service Reliability Center (SRC) Team, it has to be the word - rewarding. I started Jan as a Senior SRC Engineer, JAN 2020 (Yes just two months before we closed offices due to the onset of COVID pandemic).
- The cordoned off NOC area with empty seats and a lot of commotion on the first day. 
  Though I expected some easing into the role and understanding responsibilities, I was up for the tasks from Day 1, starting the dreaded graveyard shift immediately to play catchup with the SRC Engineer responsibilities.
- And this is where I was introduced to the refreshing culture of the team, leaving me aside the whole team - whom I had met only for a couple of days, were concerned about a 'newbie' doing the Night shift. They wanted me to have the advantage of being the new guy at least for few months. Its where I realized this team always puts its people over and above everything else.
- Easing into the new responsibilities and being part of the Team was just a click. There was never a dull moment in the office, that's how I like to describe it. Please do not form the opinion that we do not have tough task masters - Accountability and Responsibility are the two most awarded qualities here. That being said the team has always strived to keep the atmosphere friendly, light and encouraging which in turn reflects in most of the individual performances we see here.
- We all know - The pandemic hit in start of March 2020, which meant I had spend close to two months in the office (also - excluding two weeks of FEB 2020 where I got married !) - in this short duration the collaboration and team bonding I had surprises me even now.
- **GROWTH, TRUST and NEW CHALLENGES**
	- Remember me talking about the journey being rewarding and how SRC always encourages team to take new challenges. Close to SEP 2020, we onboarded the process of Incident Management for the Enterprise business silo completely. I started working as we would term it - hybrid mode, taking care of SRC operations of Healthcare Nuance and Incident Management for Enterprise.
	- Given the volume of the incidents we had - it was obvious that a dedicated team would be a requirement for the new onboarded process and the wheels started turning with the help of the very talented Hiring Ops manager- Pranav Bhalerao ! We had first few members hired almost immediately as dedicated incident managers.
	- I still remember it was a quite afternoon when Sameer (my Manager that time), Gagan (our Director), Pranav started group call and they were straight on with business - "Swapnil, you have been taking care of the incident management process almost daily, handling most of the escalations and streamlining it. This being now a new dedicated Team, we would want you to lead it. So we are promoting you as the lead for this team..." Just like that - I never thought I would be entrusted this responsibility, and no slightest of the idea of getting promoted. But I was up for it just for it - Just to live up to confidence the team had on me.
- **BUILDING A NEW TEAM**
	- This was a whole new ballgame for me. So far I have worked as a System Administrator, Product Support Analyst, an Service Reliability Engineer but never had an experience of leading a team, and to add to top that I would be the one responsible of building this new team.
	- I will be honest, I had my share of nervousness, doubts and anxiety - a lot of ANXIETY, stepping into the new shoes but as we progressed I was more relaxed as I had a great number of mentors to look up to  - Gagan, Sameer, Patrick, Pranav, Nicola and Bryan are just to name a few - But they made it easier and easier understanding the asks from the Incident Management Team and working out ways to deliver it.
	- Incident Managers - at the Enterprise Nuance  - do have their share of multi-tasking. The wide landscape of products and services offered also proves challenging and overwhelming. The team was new, it was indeed and uphill task for all of us. But I knew from the beginning even before we build the expertise and understanding of the Products and Process, it was imperative that I strive to build and replicate the culture and atmosphere of SRC within the new Incident Management Team as well.
	- The whole team was hired post offices closed due to the government mandates and COVID emergency, which meant we had not (some of still are have to) had a chance to meet in person. Developing that SRC culture in the  new team is what I thought would be a challenge.
	- But then - we do have best of the best people hired in the team. The regular virtual interactions and friendly nature of everyone ensured there were no hiccups in onboarding of new incident managers as we grew. Making everyone comfortable with the team and the work was the primary objective. The only way to facilitate that is to ensure that whole team understands - that it was Okay to make mistakes, goof up or go horribly wrong - its all part of the learning curve that we are on and we only grow and move ahead from the day before.
	- The very important factor that we could establish is the team is emphatic and understanding towards each other. This quality alone has helped the team achieve fantastic milestones. Whether its handling 300+ incidents in a month or covering shift and on-call in case of emergencies that another colleague could face - it is this very empathy and care towards fellow team members that everyone steps up, shares the load and allows other members to take care of other important things outside of their work.
	- During the initial hiring days for Incident management Team,  I remember the interview panel explaining Incident Manager responsibilities, how it might not have a very high work-life balance given nature of on-call shifts and volume of incidents. But just seeing how the team has grown and handles all the crisis of low staffing, high volume, medical emergencies of other colleagues etc. - This team has managed to have probably the best work life balance one could ask for. I am proud we were able to turn that perception around and all credit goes to the fantastic people we have in the team and makes me even more proud to be part of this team.
-
- **SEASON FINALE**
	- The Incident Management Team now runs its own boat and are their own captain. I don't remember when we would be worried about completion of tasks, or having sufficient coverage in absence of few resources etc. The team culture has been such that every individual shows accountability and takes care of all IM Operations together.
	- Like we mentioned earlier - They step up to the occasion, always and I guess that makes them a champion in their own sense. Is this the best Incident Management Team ? No, we have a long path ahead of us and a very huge scope to improve, but if there is any team that can achieve all this - its this team. A very underdog turned champion story right here.